>> Thompson: ON THIS EDITION FOR
SATURDAY, APRIL 30: DEMANDING
REFORMS IN THEIR GOVERNMENT,
IRAQI PROTESTERS STORM THE
PARLIAMENT IN BAGHDAD; IN OUR
SIGNATURE SEGMENT, THE ONGOING
SEARCH FOR VALUABLE ART WORKS
LOOTED BY THE NAZIS; AND
SENTENCED TO LIFE IN PRISON AND
THEN RELEASED, A NEW FILM TRACKS
THE LIVES OF INMATES REENTERING
SOCIETY.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
MEGAN THOMPSON.
>> Thompson: GOOD EVENING, AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
THE HEAVILY-FORTIFIED, FOUR-
SQUARE-MILE "GREEN ZONE" IN
IRAQ'S CAPITAL OF BAGHDAD IS
HOME TO GOVERNMENT OFFICES AND
FOREIGN EMBASSIES, AND
PREVIOUSLY HOUSED AMERICAN
OCCUPATION HEADQUARTERS.
TODAY, FOR THE FIRST TIME, THE
GREEN ZONE WAS BREACHED.
AFTER PULLING DOWN A SECTION OF
THE PERIMETER WALL, THOUSANDS OF
PROTESTERS LOYAL TO
CONTROVERSIAL SHIITE CLERIC
MUQTADA AL-SADR BROKE INTO
PARLIAMENT, CHANTED ANTI-
GOVERNMENT SLOGANS AND RANSACKED
THE BUILDING.
AL-SADR AND HIS FOLLOWERS OPPOSE
THE GOVERNMENT OF PRIME MINISTER
HAIDER AL-ABADI, HIMSELF A
SHIITE, FOR NOT DELIVERING
POLITICAL REFORMS.
IRAQ'S GOVERNMENT DECLARED A
STATE OF EMERGENCY AND CLOSED
ALL GATES LEADING TO BAGHDAD.
SECURITY FORCES FIRED TEAR GAS
TO DISPERSE PROTESTERS.
EARLIER IN THE DAY, IN A SHIITE
SUBURB OF BAGHDAD, SUNNI
MILITANTS FROM ISIS CARRIED OUT
A SUICIDE TRUCK BOMBING IN AN
OUTDOOR FOOD MARKET, KILLING AT
LEAST 20 PEOPLE AND WOUNDING
MORE THAN 40 OTHERS.
SECRETARY OF STATE JOHN KERRY
WILL TRAVEL TO GENEVA,
SWITZERLAND, TOMORROW FOR TALKS
TO SALVAGE A CEASE-FIRE IN
SYRIA.
HE'LL MEET WITH FOREIGN
MINISTERS OF JORDAN AND SAUDI
ARABIA AND THE UNITED NATIONS
ENVOY TO SYRIA.
WHILE THERE IS A LULL IN
FIGHTING AROUND THE CAPITAL OF
DAMASCUS, SYRIAN GOVERNMENT AIR
STRIKES ON THE DIVIDED CITY OF
ALEPPO CONTINUED FOR A NINTH
STRAIGHT DAY.
PRESIDENT BASHAR AL-ASSAD'S
WARPLANES AND HELICOPTERS STRUCK
REBEL-HELD AREAS OF ALEPPO, ONCE
SYRIA'S MOST POPULOUS CITY, NOW
MOSTLY IN RUINS.
THE INTERNATIONAL RED CROSS SAYS
NOWHERE IN THE CITY IS SAFE, AND
THOSE REMAINING FACE A
"HUMANITARIAN DISASTER."
THE SYRIAN OBSERVATORY FOR HUMAN
RIGHTS SAYS AT LEAST 250 PEOPLE
HAVE DIED IN THE LATEST ASSAULT.
AFTER THE DEVASTATING EARTHQUAKE
IN ECUADOR, SOME LAWMAKERS AND
ADVOCACY GROUPS ARE CALLING FOR
TEMPORARY PROTECTED STATUS FOR
ECUADORIANS LIVING IN THE U.S.
READ OUR REPORT ONLINE AT
www.pbs.org/newshour.
IN A GERMAN COURTROOM YESTERDAY,
A 94-YEAR-OLD FORMER NAZI GUARD
AT THE AUSCHWITZ CONCENTRATION
CAMP APOLOGIZED FOR BEING
COMPLICIT IN THE SYSTEMATIC
EXECUTION OF 170,000 EUROPEAN
JEWS.
THE TRIAL REVEALS THE RECKONING
FOR THE ATROCITIES OF WORLD WAR
II IS NOT OVER.
BEFORE HITLER'S DEATH CAMPS
KILLED SIX MILLION PEOPLE, MANY
JEWISH FAMILIES HAD THEIR
BUSINESSES AND PERSONAL PROPERTY
SEIZED BY THE NAZIS, INCLUDING
THEIR ART COLLECTIONS.
FOR SURVIVORS, THEIR CHILDREN
AND GRANDCHILDREN, FINDING THE
MISSING ART IS OFTEN A SEARCH
ACROSS CONTINENTS, AND THAT'S
JUST THE FIRST STEP OF A LEGAL
BATTLE TO GET ARTWORKS RETURNED.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
THE NEWSHOUR'S PHIL HIRSCHKORN
REPORTS ON THIS ONGOING QUEST
FOR RESTITUTION AND JUSTICE.
>> Reporter: SIMON GOODMAN HAS
SPENT 20 YEARS SEARCHING FOR HIS
FAMILY'S ART COLLECTION LOOTED
BY THE NAZIS IN WORLD WAR II.
MUCH OF THE ART, TAKEN FROM
JEWISH FAMILIES, WAS INTENDED TO
STOCK ADOLF HITLER'S PLANNED
MUSEUM IN LINZ, AUSTRIA.
GOODMAN'S GRANDFATHER, FRITZ,
WAS A WEALTHY DUTCH BANKER WHO
AMASSED A GREAT ART COLLECTION
WITH HIS WIFE, LOUISE.
>> HE HAD AT LEAST 60 OLD
MASTERS, SOME OF THEM VERY
IMPORTANT.
SOME IMPRESSIONISTS.
>> Reporter: AFTER THE NAZIS
OCCUPIED THE NETHERLANDS,
HITLER'S ART AGENTS FORCED FRITZ
AND LOUISE TO SELL, TELLING THEM
IF THEY DID, THEY WOULD SURVIVE.
>> THEY TAKE EVERYTHING, ALL THE
WAY DOWN TO THE CHINA TEACUPS.
THE TRICK WAS THAT THEY WOULD BE
GIVEN A TRAIN TICKET TO ITALY,
AND THAT TRAIN TICKET ENDED UP
TAKING THEM TO A CONCENTRATION
CAMP INSTEAD.
>> Reporter: GOODMAN'S
GRANDPARENTS WERE KILLED IN THE
CAMPS.
HIS FATHER, BERNARD, LIVING IN
ENGLAND, SURVIVED THE WAR, GOT
MARRIED AND HAD SIMON AND HIS
BROTHER, NICK.
BERNARD TRAVELED FREQUENTLY TO
LOOK FOR THE MISSING ART.
SOME RESURFACED IN THE
NETHERLANDS, BUT IT WAS A FIGHT
TO GET IT BACK.
>> THE DUTCH GOVERNMENT DIDN'T
CONSIDER A FORCED SALE TO BE ANY
KIND OF EXTENUATING
CIRCUMSTANCES.
THEY SAID, "IT'S STILL A SALE.
YOU COMPLIED.
YOU SIGNED THIS CONTRACT."
>> Reporter: AFTER BERNARD DIED
IN 1994, BOXES OF HIS PAPERS
ARRIVED AT SIMON'S DOORSTEP IN
LOS ANGELES.
AS SIMON RECOUNTS IN HIS NEW
MEMOIR, "THE ORPHEUS CLOCK," A
REFERENCE TO A PIECE THAT HE
EVENTUALLY RECOVERED, HIS
FATHER'S QUEST BECAME HIS OWN.
ONE OF THE MOST IMPORTANT PIECES
OF EVIDENCE THAT WAS IN YOUR
FATHER'S PAPERS WAS AN ENVELOPE
WITH THREE BLACK-AND-WHITE
SLIDES.
WHAT DID THAT SHOW?
>> I HELD THEM UP TO THE LIGHT.
THEY WERE OBVIOUSLY FRENCH
IMPRESSIONIST PAINTINGS.
SO, WE HAD THEM BLOWN UP, AND
THEN WE STARTED ASKING AROUND.
ONE, I COULD CLEARLY SEE ONE WAS
BY EDGAR DEGAS.
>> Reporter: THIS 1980 DEGAS
LANDSCAPE WAS A PAINTING HIS
GRANDPARENTS WERE FORCED TO
SELL.
SIMON FIRST SAW A COLOR IMAGE OF
IT IN A BOOK AT U.C.L.A. LIBRARY
IN 1995.
>> SO, REALLY, MY LIFE CHANGES
AT THAT POINT.
>> Reporter: THE COLLECTOR WHO
HAD PURCHASED THE DEGAS HAD
DONATED IT TO THE ART INSTITUTE
OF CHICAGO.
SIMON AND HIS BROTHER SUED AND
IN 1998 WERE NAMED THE RIGHTFUL
OWNERS.
THEY AGREED TO SPLIT THE VALUE
OF THE PAINTING WITH THE
COLLECTOR, AND THE MUSEUM BOUGHT
OUT THEIR HALF.
THE SUCCESSFUL CLAIM WAS THE
FIRST CASE OF ITS KIND IN THE
U.S., AND MANY MORE HAVE
FOLLOWED FOR THEM AND FOR OTHER
FAMILIES, IN OTHER MUSEUMS AND
IN OTHER COUNTRIES.
>> IT'S LIKE A FORENSIC JOB.
YOU'RE TRYING TO PIECE TOGETHER
THE OWNERSHIP HISTORY OF A
PAINTING.
>> Reporter: LUCIAN SIMMONS' JOB
IS TO CHECK ARTWORKS OFFERED TO
SOTHEBY'S AUCTION HOUSE AND WEED
OUT ANY WITH A TAINTED PAST BY
CHECKING DOCUMENTS, PHYSICALLY
EXAMINING THE ART AND CHECKING
DATABASES OF MISSING WORKS.
>> THAT PROCESS IS DESIGNED TO
ASCERTAIN WHETHER OR NOT THE
PAINTING COULD HAVE BEEN IN, IF
YOU LIKE, THE WRONG PLACE AT THE
WRONG TIME.
COULD HAVE BEEN IN CONTINENTAL
EUROPE BETWEEN 1933 AND 1945 AND
COULD HAVE BEEN STOLEN.
ONCE IN A BLUE MOON, WE FIND A
PICTURE WHICH WAS WITH A BAD
PERSON, SOMEBODY WHO'S A RED
FLAG.
>> Reporter: SO, I GUESS THE
EASY ONES TO REJECT ARE THE ONES
THAT HAVE BEEN REPORTED STOLEN
IN THE ART LOSS REGISTER AND
SIMILAR DATABASES?
>> WE WOULDN'T REJECT THEM.
WHAT WE DO IS TO SAY TO OUR
CONSIGNER, OUR CLIENT, "LOOK, WE
HAVE A PROBLEM HERE.
LET'S NOW SIT DOWN TOGETHER AND
TRY AND WORK OUT IF WE CAN BRING
ABOUT A RESOLUTION."
>> Reporter: I IMAGINE THE
REACTION IS, "YOU'VE GOT TO BE
KIDDING ME.
I PAID GOOD MONEY FOR THIS.
I DID NOTHING WRONG.
I HAVE A LEGAL BILL OF SALE."
>> IT'S A TYPICAL REACTION.
OR PEOPLE SAY, "I NEVER KNEW.
I INHERITED THIS FROM MY
GRANDMOTHER."
IT'S A SHOCK, BUT MY JOB IS TO
ACTUALLY TALK PEOPLE OFF THE
LEDGE AND THEN TRY AND MAKE IT
IN FROM A BAD STORY TO A GOOD
STORY.
>> Reporter: SIMMONS AND
SOTHEBY'S WERE ABLE TO TURN A
BAD STORY INTO A GOOD STORY BY
SELLING THIS PARIS STREET SCENE
BY FRENCH IMPRESSIONIST CAMILLE
PISSARRO.
THE PAINTING HAD BELONGED TO A
GERMAN-JEWISH BUSINESSMAN KILLED
IN THE HOLOCAUST.
WHEN THE PAINTING RESURFACED IN
THE ISRAEL MUSEUM 60 YEARS
LATER, THE FAMILY MADE A CLAIM.
THE MUSEUM RETURNED IT TO THE
FAMILY, WHO TOOK IT TO
SOTHEBY'S, WHO SOLD IT FOR
$31,000,000 IN 2014.
MUSEUMS ARE OFTEN CAUGHT IN THE
MIDDLE.
>> BEFORE WE BUY A WORK OF ART,
WE DO AS MUCH RESEARCH AS WE
CAN.
>> Reporter: ERIC LEE IS
DIRECTOR OF THE KIMBELL ART
MUSEUM IN FORT WORTH, TEXAS.
AFTER A FLURRY OF LOOTED ART
CLAIMS 15 YEARS AGO, AMERICAN
MUSEUMS ADOPTED GUIDELINES
TELLING THEM HOW TO HANDLE NAZI-
LOOTED ART.
>> IT'S AN ONGOING PROCESS, BUT
THERE ARE ALWAYS GAPS.
AND RARELY DO WE HAVE A HISTORY
OF COMPLETE OWNERSHIP OF A WORK
OF ART FROM THE TIME IT WAS
CREATED UNTIL TODAY.
>> Reporter: THE KIMBELL DECIDED
TO REVIEW EVERYTHING AND BE
TRANSPARENT, POSTING ONLINE THE
OWNERSHIP HISTORIES, CALLING THE
PROVENANCE.
SOMETIMES THIS PROCESS MEANT
RECKONING WITH UNCOMFORTABLE
TRUTHS.
THIS CANVASS BY 19th CENTURY
BRITISH PAINTER JOSEPH TURNER
HUNG IN THE MUSEUM FOR 40 YEARS.
IN 2006, A FAMILY CAME FORWARD
WITH PROOF THE PAINTING WAS
LOOTED FROM THEM.
THE KIMBELL RETURNED IT AND THEN
REPURCHASED AT AUCTION FOR
$6,000,000, A BIG PRICE FOR
DOING THE RIGHT THING.
AND THEN IT HAPPENED AGAIN.
>> IT'S A SCULPTURE OF EXTREMELY
HIGH QUALITY OF A VERY BEAUTIFUL
WOMAN FROM THE ITALIAN
RENAISSANCE.
>> Reporter: IN 2011, LEE WAS
SHOWN THIS PHOTOGRAPH OF THE
SCULPTURE IN THE HANDS OF A
SPECIAL ALLIED ARMY UNIT
DEDICATED TO POST-WAR ART
RECOVERY, "THE MONUMENTS MEN,"
WHO FOUND IT STASHED WITH NAZI
LOOT IN AN AUSTRIAN SALT MINE.
>> I WAS COMPLETELY FLOORED BY
THIS.
WE HAD NO IDEA THAT THE
SCULPTURE HAD BEEN TAKEN BY THE
NAZIS.
>> Reporter: BECAUSE THE
SCULPTURE WAS RETURNED AFTER THE
WAR TO THE RIGHTFUL OWNERS
BEFORE BEING RESOLD, THE KIMBELL
GOT TO KEEP IT.
THE LATEST LOOTED ART CASE TO BE
SETTLED IN THE U.S. INVOLVED THE
UNIVERSITY OF OKLAHOMA.
>> HIT ME RIGHT BETWEEN THE EYES
THE MINUTE I LEARNED OF THIS.
>> Reporter: WHAT UNIVERSITY
PRESIDENT DAVID BOREN LEARNED
ABOUT IN 2012 WAS THAT THERE WAS
A PROBLEM WITH A GIFT OF 30
PAINTINGS BEQUEATHED TO THE
SCHOOL BY A PROMINENT OKLAHOMA
FAMILY 12 YEARS EARLIER.
AMONG THEM WAS THIS PISSARRO
PAINTING OF A SHEPHERDESS.
AFTER THE WAR, IT TRAVELED FROM
FRANCE TO SWITZERLAND, THE
NETHERLANDS AND NEW YORK, WHERE
A GALLERY SOLD IT TO THE
OKLAHOMA FAMILY IN 1956.
JUST FOUR YEAR AGO, THE HEIR OF
A JEWISH COUPLE WHOSE COLLECTION
WAS LOOTED DURING THE NAZI
OCCUPATION OF FRANCE, SAID THE
PISSARRO WAS HERS.
THEN, SHE SUED THE UNIVERSITY IN
FEDERAL COURT TO GET IT BACK.
>> SO, WE WERE CONFRONTED WITH A
VERY DIFFICULT SITUATION.
A VERY GENEROUS DONOR WHO IN
GOOD FAITH GAVE US THIS ART, AND
ANOTHER FAMILY THAT CLEARLY HAD
THIS ART STOLEN FROM THEM BY THE
NAZIS.
>> Reporter: LAST MONTH, THE
UNIVERSITY SETTLED THE CASE,
CEDING TITLE, OR OWNERSHIP, TO
THE FRENCH CLAIMANT AND AGREEING
TO SHARE ITS PUBLIC DISPLAY-- A
FEW YEARS IN PARIS, THEN A FEW
YEARS IN OKLAHOMA AND BACK
AGAIN.
>> IT'S AN ETHICAL AND MORAL
ISSUE, NOT JUST A LEGAL ISSUE.
WE WEREN'T ABOUT TO TRY TO
COMPROMISE OUR ETHICS IN ORDER
TO CONTINUE TO BUILD
COLLECTIONS.
>> Reporter: CLAUDIA SHAUM'S
FAMILY NEVER HAD A BIG
COLLECTION, BUT HER GRANDPARENTS
BOUGHT SOME PAINTINGS IN THE
1920s AND '30s.
DECADES LATER, HER PARENTS
INHERITED THEM, INCLUDING THIS
SMALL PICTURE OF "A MAN AND A
WIFE WEIGHING GOLD" BY A 17th
CENTURY DUTCH ARTIST.
IT HUNG IN THE MANHATTAN
APARTMENT WHERE SHAUM GREW UP.
>> I REMEMBER EXACTLY WHERE IT
WAS.
PASSED BY IT EVERY DAY.
>> Reporter: WHEN HER FATHER
DIED IN 2011, SHAUM AND HER
SIBLINGS TRIED TO SELL IT ALONG
WITH OTHER PAINTINGS HE OWNED.
SOTHEBY'S AUCTIONED FIVE OF
THEM, BUT DECLINED TO SELL THE
DUTCH PAINTING, WHICH HAD BEEN
APPRAISED AT $400,000.
CHRISTIE'S PASSED ON IT, TOO.
THE RED FLAG?
A NAZI OFFICER NAMED "MENTON"
ONCE POSSESSED IT.
SHAUM WAS UNABLE TO PROVE IT WAS
NEVER STOLEN.
>> SOTHEBY'S JUST SAID, "FULL
STOP, OUT, WE'RE NOT TOUCHING
IT."
AND THEIR RECOMMENDATION AT THE
TIME WAS "JUST HAVE A FAMILY
MEMBER HANG IT ON THEIR WALL,
BECAUSE THAT'S JUST ALL THAT'S
EVER GOING TO HAPPEN TO THIS
PAINTING."
>> Reporter: IT'S TAINTED?
>> YEAH.
EXACTLY.
>> Reporter: IN THE PAST YEAR,
SHAUM GAVE UP.
TODAY, IT HANGS IN HER BROTHER'S
HOME.
IRONICALLY, THE NOTORIETY OF
BEING LOOTED CAN ADD VALUE TO AN
ART WORK.
>> IT'S A RARE PICTURE, AND IT'S
IN BEAUTIFUL CONDITION.
>> Reporter: SINCE LUCIAN
SIMMONS STARTED HIS JOB AT
SOTHEBY'S 21 YEARS AGO, THE
AUCTION HOUSE HAS CLEARED AND
SOLD $800,000,000 OF ONCE-LOOTED
ART.
>> THEY USED TO SAY, "DON'T
MENTION THIS DIFFICULT HISTORY
OF A PAINTING.
PEOPLE WON'T WANT TO KNOW THAT
THIS BELONGED MAYBE TO A NAZI OR
STOLEN FROM A JEWISH FAMILY."
BUT NOW PEOPLE HAVE GONE THE
OTHER WAY IN THAT THEY ACTUALLY
WANT TO HEAR THE STORY.
THEY WANT TO HEAR THE BACKGROUND
OF THE PAINTING.
>> Reporter: NEXT MONTH,
SOTHEBY'S WILL AUCTION THIS
PAINTING FROM 1660 BY THE DUTCH
ARTIST GABRIEL METSU.
IT BELONGED TO THE ROTHSCHILD
FAMILY IN VIENNA UNTIL THE NAZIS
TOOK IT IN 1938 AND HUNG IT IN
HITLER'S RESIDENCE IN MUNICH.
THE MONUMENTS MEN FOUND IT AFTER
THE WAR WITH A NAZI INVENTORY
NUMBER ON THE BACK.
>> THE ACCOUNTS CLERKS IN THE
MUSEUM MARKED THIS "A.R."
THIS IS ALFONSE VON ROTHSCHILD,
857.
>> Reporter: A STORY THAT IS
PART OF THE MARKETING OF A
PAINTING ESTIMATED TO BE WORTH
$6 MILLION TO $8 MILLION.
>> THE PROVENANCE IS CERTAINLY
GOING TO ADD TO ITS RARITY, ADD
TO ITS APPEAL.
>> Reporter: HITLER'S MUSEUM
NEVER GOT BUILT, BUT TENS OF
THOUSANDS OF ART WORKS STOLEN IN
HIS NAME ARE UNACCOUNTED FOR.
SIMON GOODMAN IS STILL
SEARCHING.
HE CURRENTLY HAS A CLAIM AGAINST
THE BOIJMANS MUSEUM IN ROTTERDAM
FOR THESE HAND-PAINTED
RENAISSANCE-ERA DISHES.
ONLY RECENTLY DID AMSTERDAM'S
RIJKSMUSEUM RETURN HIS FAMILY'S
500-YEAR-OLD SILVER AND GOLD
PITCHER AND THESE 17th CENTURY
CHINESE VASES.
ARE YOU DOING THIS FOR THE
MONEY?
>> THE MONEY IS IMPORTANT
BECAUSE IT'S OUR... IT'S MY
DELAYED INHERITANCE.
IT'S MY FAMILY'S HERITAGE.
THESE ARE OUR BELONGINGS.
BUT MY PRIMARY MOTIVATION IS, AS
LONG AS THESE THINGS ARE OUT
THERE THAT BELONG TO MY FAMILY,
AND IT'S MY DUTY TO GET THEM
BACK, BECAUSE OTHERWISE, IN A
WAY, HITLER WON.
>> Thompson: TODAY MARKS THE
CULMINATION OF "NATIONAL REENTRY
WEEK," A FEDERAL JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT EFFORT TO EXPAND
RESOURCES TO HELP PEOPLE GETTING
OUT OF PRISON.
FOR INSTANCE, THE JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT SAYS, 60% TO 75% OF
FORMER INMATES FAIL TO LAND A
JOB IN THEIR FIRST YEAR OUT.
A NEW DOCUMENTARY CALLED "THE
RETURN" CHRONICLES THE STRUGGLE
OF EX-CONVICTS AS THEY LOOK FOR
WORK, RESTORE RELATIONSHIPS AND
COPE WITH PROBLEMS.
THE FILM IS SET IN CALIFORNIA,
WHERE VOTERS DECIDED FOUR YEARS
AGO TO REFORM THE STATE'S "THREE
STRIKES AND YOU'RE OUT" LAW.
THE REFORM HAS LED TO THE
RELEASE OF MORE THAN 2,100
INMATES WHO WERE SENTENCED TO
LIFE IN PRISON FOR NONVIOLENT
CRIMES.
"THE RETURN" WILL BE SHOWN ON
THE PBS SERIES "P.O.V." ON MAY
23.
HERE IS AN EXCERPT.
>> THE CASE FOR A GUY WHO GOT A
THIRD STRIKE FOR THE SALE OF $5
WORTH OF CRACK COCAINE.
AND THEY DECIDE THE CASE IN 30
SECONDS.
SO IT WASN'T JUST THAT THIS
PERSON WAS GETTING A LIFE
SENTENCE.
IT WAS THAT THE SYSTEM TOLERATED
IT AND EXPECTED IT, AND IT WAS
SO AUTOMATIC.
>> YOU KNOW, "MIERNGZ WAS AT
SALINAS VALLEY 13 YEARS.
SO THIS IS IMPORTANT TO US
BECAUSE WE REMEMBER WHAT IT WAS
LIKE TO GET OUT.
>> Thompson: NEWSHOUR SPECIAL
CORRESPONDENT ALISON STEWART
SPOKE WITH THE DIRECTORS, KATIE
GALLOWAY AND KELLY DUANE DE LA
VEGA.
KELLY, OF ALL THE FILMS YOU
COULD MAKE, WHAT SPOKE TO YOU
ABOUT THE IDEA OF MAKING A FILM
ABOUT PEOPLE WHO HAD BEEN
INCARCERATED UNDER THE THREE
STRIKES LAW AND ON THE VERGE OF
GETTING OUT?
>> THIS WAS THE FIRST TIME IN
OUR NATION'S HISTORY THAT VOTERS
SCALED BACK THE SENTENCES OF THE
CURRENTLY INCARCERATED.
SO WE WERE EXCITED ABOUT
FOLLOWING REFORM.
WE WANTED TO SEE WHAT THE
IMPLEMENTATION WOULD LOOK LIKE,
WHAT WE COULD LEARN FROM IT.
WE WERE VERY HOPEFUL THAT IT
WOULD BE AN OPTIMISTIC STORY,
AND IN MANY WAYS IT IS, AND IN
MANY WAYS IT REALLY ILLUMINATES
THE COLLATERAL DAMAGE OF WHAT
HAPPENS WHEN YOU HAVE DRACONIAN
SENTENCING POLICIES THAT AFFECT
MILLIONS OF PEOPLE.
>> Stewart: IF SOMEONE HASN'T
SEEN THE FILM, I WANT YOU TO SET
THE STAGE FOR WHO THEY'RE GOING
TO MEET AND AT WHAT POINT IN
THEIR LIFE THESE PEOPLE ARE AND
WHAT THEIR HOPES AND
EXPECTATIONS ARE.
>> SO, WE STARTED FOLLOWING THE
STORY RIGHT AFTER PROP 36
PASSED, WHICH IS THREE STRIKES
REFORM, IN 2012.
AND THEY HADN'T GIVEN A LOT OF
THOUGHT TO WHAT WOULD COME NEXT.
SO IT WAS SORT OF LIKE THE
AFTERMATH OF THIS VOTE THAT
SURPRISED EVERYBODY.
CALIFORNIA IN SO MANY WAYS LED
THE COUNTRY INTO THE MORASS OF
MASS INCARCERATION.
AND SUDDENLY, 70% OF VOTERS
SAID, "OKAY, NOW LET'S LET
THOUSANDS OF LIFERS OUT OVER THE
NEXT FEW YEARS."
SO YOU HAD INSTITUTIONS FROM THE
COURT TO PRISONS TO RE-ENTRY
HOMES TO THE THREE STRIKES
CLINIC.
AND THOUSANDS OF INDIVIDUALS WHO
WERE INCARCERATED UNDER THREE
STRIKES, AND THEIR FAMILIES
SAYING, "NOW WHAT?"
BUT NOBODY REALLY KNEW WHAT TO
EXPECT.
>> Stewart: WHAT WERE SOME OF
THE UNINTENDED CONSEQUENCES OF
THAT SORT OF VERY SUDDEN CHANGE
IN THE LAW?
WHAT DID YOU OBSERVE?
>> YOU KNOW, IT'S INTERESTING.
MOST OF THE TIME WHEN YOU GET
RELEASED FROM PRISON YOU'RE ON
PAROLE, AND THAT CAN BE A GOOD
THING AND A VERY, VERY BAD
THING.
A LOT OF PEOPLE GET TRAPPED UP
IN THE SYSTEM BECAUSE OF PAROLE
VIOLATIONS, AND THE PAROLE
SYSTEM ISN'T ALWAYS HELPFUL.
AND IN THE FILM, ONE OF OUR
CHARACTERS GETS A JOB.
HE'S THRILLED TO HAVE A JOB, BUT
HIS PAROLE OFFICER MAKES HIM
MEET IN THE MIDDLE OF THE DAY,
SO IT THREATENS HIS EMPLOYMENT.
THAT SAID, WITH PAROLE, THERE
TENDS TO BE ACCESS TO SOME
SERVICES.
FOR THIS PARTICULAR POPULATION,
A LOT OF THEM ARE RELEASED
WITHOUT PAROLE, WHICH SHUT THEM
OUT OF SOME OF THE SERVICES THAT
YOU WOULD NORMALLY GET.
SO THERE WASN'T A LOT OF MONEY
FOR HOUSING.
AND THAT HAD TO BE SORT OF
ORGANIZED, AND A LOT OF THAT WAS
ORGANIZED BY THE PEOPLE AT THE
THREE STRIKES PROJECT BASED
OUT OF STANFORD.
>> Stewart: KATIE, ONE OF THE
THINGS I FOUND OF FOUND REALLY
INTERESTING IS BESIDES ALL THESE
SORT OF INSTITUTIONAL ISSUES TO
OVERCOME, JUST THE PASSING OF
TIME AND HOW QUICKLY THINGS
CHANGE IN OUR CULTURE NOW.
SOME OF THE PEOPLE IN YOUR FILM
HAD OBSTACLES DEALING WITH
THINGS LIKE COMPUTERS AND
iPHONES.
TELL US MORE ABOUT THE
DAY-TO-DAY OBSTACLES THEY FACE.
>> ABSOLUTELY.
I THINK PEOPLE DO THINK ABOUT
HOUSING AND JOBS AS SOME OF THE
BIG OBSTACLES, AND CLEARLY THEY
ARE.
BUT TO STEP INTO A CAR AFTER 17
OR 19 YEARS IN PRISON AND HAVE
SIRI COME, YOU KNOW, SORT OF
PERMEATE YOUR SPACE AND TELL YOU
WHERE TO GO WAS MIND-BOGGLING
FOR SOME OF THE PEOPLE COMING
OUT.
>> Stewart: AFTER THE MOVIE IS
SCREENED, WHAT DO YOU HOPE
PEOPLE TAKE AWAY?
>> WE WANT PEOPLE ON COME AWAY
WITH A DEEPER UNDERSTANDING OF
WHO'S INCARCERATED, AND
DEFINITELY WANT THEM TO COME
AWAY WITH A DEEPER
UNDERSTANDING, AS WE DO AFTER
FILMING THIS, MAKING THIS
PROJECT, OF WHAT'S NEEDED FOR
RE-ENTRY TO BE SUCCESSFUL.
MORE THAN 600,000 PEOPLE GET OUT
A YEAR.
WHAT ARE WE GOING TO DO TO MAKE
SURE THAT THEY HAVE WHAT THEY
NEED TO LEAD HEALTHIER, MORE
PRODUCTIVE LIVES, WHICH
ULTIMATELY HAS NOT JUST MORAL
BUT FISCAL BENEFITS TO US ALL.
>> Thompson: THE TEENAGE BIRTH
RATE IN THE UNITED STATES HAS
HIT AN ALL-TIME LOW, ACCORDING
TO A REPORT THIS WEEK FROM THE
CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL AND
PREVENTION.
THE C.D.C. SAYS DURING THE LAST
25 YEARS, THE TEEN BIRTH RATE
HAS FALLEN FROM 62 BIRTHS FOR
EVERY 1,000 TEENAGE WOMEN TO 24
PER 1,000.
THE DROP IS STEEPEST AMONG
MINORITIES IN THE PAST DECADE,
WITH PREGNANCIES DOWN 44% FOR
BLACK TEENS AND DOWN 51% AMONG
HISPANICS.
JOINING ME NOW FROM BALTIMORE TO
DISCUSS THE FINDINGS IS DR.
WANDA BARFIELD, THE C.D.C.'S
DIRECTOR OF THE DIVISION OF
REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH.
DR. BARFIELD, WHY HAS THIS
DECREASE BEEN SO DRAMATIC?
>> WELL, ON THE EVE OF TEEN
PREGNANCY PREVENTION MORNING
WE'VE SEEN SOME PRETTY DRAMATIC
DECLINES IN TEEN BIRTHS AMONG
BLACK AND MINORITY TEENS.
ANDS YOU KNOW, WE'VE SEEN NEARLY
50% DECLINE FOR BOTH BLACK AND
HISPANICS.
AND AN OVERALL DECLINE FOR ALL
TEEN BOTHERS.
AND THE REASONS FOR THIS APPEAR
TO BE DECLINES DUE TO INCREASES
IN TEEN PREGNANCY PREVENTION
EFFORTS THAT ARE AT THE
COMMUNITY LEVEL.
>> Thompson: WHY SPECIFICALLY
THE DRAMATIC DROP AMONG MINORITY
TEENS?
>> SO WHAT WE'RE SEEING IS
COMMUNITY-BASED INTERVENTIONS
APPEAR TO BE EFFECTIVE IN
PREVENTING TEEN BIRTHS.
WE'RE SEEING DECLINES IN SEXUAL
ACTIVITY AMONG TEENS, AS WELL AS
INCREASES IN THE USE OF THE MOST
EFFECTIVE CONTRACEPTIVE METHODS
AVAILABLE.
>> Thompson: BUT MINORITY
TEENS STILL HAVE ABOUT DOUBLE
THE BIRTH RATE, RIGHT?
>> YES.
WHAT WE'RE SEEING IS THAT
NATIONALLY, BLACK AND HISPANIC
TEENS HAVE TWICE THE RATE OF
TEEN BIRTHS AS COMPARED TO
WHITES, AND IN SOME STATES, IT'S
AS HIGH AS THREE-FOLD.
>> Thompson: CAN YOU TALK A
LITTLE BIT ABOUT HOW SEX ED
PLAYS A ROLE IN ALL OF THIS?
THERE WAS A RECEIPT SURVEY THAT
FOUND ROUGHLY 50% OF AMERICAN
TEENS DON'T LEARN ABOUT BIRTH
CONTROL IN SCHOOL BEFORE HAVING
SEX FOR THE FIRST TIME.
>> SO SEXUAL HEALTH EDUCATION
PLAYS AN IMPORTANT ROLE IN THE
PREVENTION OF TEEN PREGNANCY.
ALTHOUGH THE DATA THAT WE HAVE
HERE AT C.D.C. IN THIS REPORT
ARE NOT HIGHLIGHTED AROUND
SEXUAL HEALTH EDUCATION, WHAT WE
DO KNOW FROM OTHER C.D.C. DATA
IS THAT TEENS ARE NOT GETTING
ACCESS TO SEXUAL HEALTH
INFORMATION.
SO TEEN REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH
SERVICES PLAY AN IMPORTANT ROLE
IN THE PREVENTION OF TEEN
PREGNANCY.
>> Thompson: HOW DOES THE TEEN
BIRTH RATE DIFFER FROM COMMUNITY
TO COMMUNITY?
>> EVEN STATE THAT MAY HAVE LOW
RATES OF TEEN PREGNANCY MAY HAVE
AREAS WHERE WE'RE SEEING HIGH
RATES OF TEEN PREGNANCY WITHIN
SPECIFIC COMMUNITIES.
SO AS A RESULT, IT'S REALLY
IMPORTANT THAT WE LOOK LOCALLY,
THAT WE ENGAGE COMMUNITIES IN
TEEN PREGNANCY PREVENTION.
>> Thompson: DR. BARFIELD FROM
THE C.D.C., THANK YOU SO MUCH
FOR JOINING US.
>> THANK YOU, MEGAN.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Thompson: IN THE RACE FOR THE
WHITE HOUSE, REPUBLICAN
FRONTRUNNER DONALD TRUMP LOOKS
LIKE HE WILL EXPAND HIS OVERALL
LEAD IN DELEGATES TO THE
REPUBLICAN NATIONAL CONVENTION,
WITH SOME MORE HELP FROM
PENNSYLVANIA.
THE ASSOCIATED PRESS HAS
SURVEYED THE 54 REPUBLICAN
DELEGATES WHO ARE UNBOUND, OR
NOT REQUIRED TO VOTE FOR ANY
PARTICULAR CANDIDATE ON THE
NATIONAL CONVENTION'S FIRST
BALLOT, AND THE A.P. FOUND 40 OF
THEM FAVOR TRUMP.
TRUMP SWEPT PENNSYLVANIA'S 17
OTHER DELEGATES WHEN HE WON THE
STATE'S PRIMARY LAST TUESDAY
WITH 57% OF THE VOTE.
TRUMP CAMPAIGNS TOMORROW IN
INDIANA, WHICH HOLDS ITS
PRESIDENTIAL PRIMARY TUESDAY.
TEXAS SENATOR TED CRUZ, WHO IS
BANKING ON STOPPING TRUMP'S
MOMENTUM IN INDIANA, IS AIMING
TO PICK UP A DOZEN OR MORE
DELEGATES AT THE STATE
REPUBLICAN CONVENTION IN
VIRGINIA THIS WEEKEND.
THE NATIONAL WEATHER SERVICE HAS
ISSUED SEVERE THUNDERSTORM AND
FLASH FLOOD ALERTS IN THE
HOUSTON AREA, LOUISIANA AND
MISSISSIPPI.
IN PALESTINE, TEXAS, 100 MILES
SOUTHEAST OF DALLAS, A
GRANDMOTHER AND HER FOUR
GRANDCHILDREN DROWNED IN FLOOD
WATERS THAT ROSE TO THE ROOF OF
THEIR HOUSE FOLLOWING TORRENTIAL
RAINS.
AN HOUR NORTH, IN LINDALE,
TEXAS, A SUSPECTED TORNADO
CAUSED ROOFS AND WALLS TO
COLLAPSE ON A NUMBER OF HOMES
AND BUSINESSES.
THE EAST AFRICAN NATION OF KENYA
SENT A DRAMATIC MESSAGE TO IVORY
POACHERS AND SMUGGLERS TODAY.
KENYAN PRESIDENT UHURU KENYATTA
SET FIRE TO 115 TONS OF ELEPHANT
AND RHINO TUSKS INSIDE THE
NAIROBI NATIONAL PARK.
THE TUSKS CAME FROM 8,000
ELEPHANTS AND 350 RHINOS AND ARE
WORTH ABOUT $300 MILLION.
AFRICA'S POPULATION OF BOTH
ANIMALS IS DWINDLING.
POACHERS KILLED AN ESTIMATED
20,000 ELEPHANTS AND 1,300
RHINOS JUST LAST YEAR.
PRESIDENT KENYATTA SAYS HE'LL
PRESS FOR A WORLDWIDE BAN ON
IVORY SALES AT AN ENDANGERED
SPECIES CONFERENCE IN SOUTH
AFRICA LATER THIS YEAR.
>> Thompson: AND FINALLY
TONIGHT, SOME HEALTH TIPS FROM
WALT WHITMAN, THE 19th CENTURY
AMERICAN POET BEST KNOWN FOR HIS
"LEAVES OF GRASS."
A UNIVERSITY OF HOUSTON GRADUATE
STUDENT HAS UNCOVERED AN ADVICE
COLUMN WHITMAN WROTE UNDER A
PSEUDONYM FOR A NEW YORK
NEWSPAPER IN 1858.
IT WAS CALLED "MANLY HEALTH AND
TRAINING."
A WHITMAN SAMPLER:
"LET THE MAIN PART OF YOUR DIET
BE MEAT.
WEAR COMFORTABLE SHOES.
EXERCISE MODERATELY.
GO DANCING AND TAKE A COLD BATH
EVERY DAY."
WHITMAN LIVED TO BE 72.
AND THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION
OF PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M MEGAN THOMPSON.
GOOD NIGHT.